8.0 Update for Choose a web UI (#30569)
dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs: aspnetcore/tutorials/choose-web-ui.md

author: wadepickett
description: Learn when to use which ASP.NET Core web UI technologies. Understand the server, client and hybrid options.
ms.author: wpickett
ms.date: 10/04/2023
uid: tutorials/choose-web-ui
---
# Choose an ASP.NET Core web UI

ASP.NET Core is a complete UI framework. Choose which functionalities to combine that fit the app's web UI needs.

## ASP.NET Core Blazor

Blazor is a full-stack web UI framework and is recommended for most web UI scenarios.

Benefits of using Blazor:

* Reusable component model.
* Efficient diff-based component rendering.
* Flexibly render components from the server or client via WebAssembly.
* Build rich interactive web UI components in C#.
* Render components statically from the server.

> * Progressively enhance server-rendered components for smoother navigation and form handling and to enable streaming rendering.

Author: ```suggestion
* Progressively enhance server rendered components for smoother navigation and form handling and to enable streaming rendering.
```

Running .NET code inside web browsers is made possible by [WebAssembly](https://webassembly.org) (abbreviated `wasm`). WebAssembly is a compact bytecode format optimized for fast download and maximum execution speed. WebAssembly is an open web standard and supported in web browsers without plugins. Blazor WebAssembly works in all modern web browsers, including mobile browsers.

When a Blazor WebAssembly is built and run:

* C# code files and Razor files are compiled into .NET assemblies.
* The assemblies and the [.NET runtime](/dotnet/framework/get-started/overview) are downloaded to the browser.
* Blazor WebAssembly bootstraps the .NET runtime and configures the runtime to load the assemblies for the app. The Blazor WebAssembly runtime uses JavaScript interop to handle DOM manipulation and browser API calls.

> For a complete overview Blazor, its architecture and benefits, see <xref:blazor/index> and <xref:blazor/hosting-models>. To get started with your first Blazor app, see [Build your first Blazor app](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/learn/aspnet/blazor-tutorial/intro).

Author: ```suggestion
For a complete overview of Blazor, its architecture and benefits, see <xref:blazor/index> and <xref:blazor/hosting-models>. To get started with your first Blazor app, see [Build your first Blazor app](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/learn/aspnet/blazor-tutorial/intro).
```

author: wadepickett
description: Learn when to use which ASP.NET Core web UI technologies. Understand the server, client and hybrid options.
ms.author: wpickett
ms.date: 10/04/2023
uid: tutorials/choose-web-ui
---
# Choose an ASP.NET Core web UI

ASP.NET Core is a complete UI framework. Choose which functionalities to combine that fit the app's web UI needs.

> ## Blazor: the recommended ASP.NET full-stack web UI

Reviewer: How about this?:

```suggestion
## Full-stack web UI with Blazor
```

Blazor provides an all-in-one web app solution and is recommended as a first choice for most ASP.NET web UI scenarios, starting with .NET 8.

Blazor is a full-stack web UI framework for developing apps that renders content at a reusable component or page level with:

> * Switchable rendering modes that can be chosen at runtime for server side or client side interactivity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Switchable rendering modes that can be chosen at runtime for server-side or client-side interactivity.
```

Running .NET code inside web browsers is made possible by [WebAssembly](https://webassembly.org) (abbreviated `wasm`). WebAssembly is a compact bytecode format optimized for fast download and maximum execution speed. WebAssembly is an open web standard and supported in web browsers without plugins. Blazor WebAssembly works in all modern web browsers, including mobile browsers.

When a Blazor WebAssembly is built and run:

* C# code files and Razor files are compiled into .NET assemblies.
* The assemblies and the [.NET runtime](/dotnet/framework/get-started/overview) are downloaded to the browser.
* Blazor WebAssembly bootstraps the .NET runtime and configures the runtime to load the assemblies for the app. The Blazor WebAssembly runtime uses JavaScript interop to handle DOM manipulation and browser API calls.

For a complete overview Blazor, its architecture and benefits, see <xref:blazor/index> and <xref:blazor/hosting-models>. To get started with your first Blazor app, see [Build your first Blazor app](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/learn/aspnet/blazor-tutorial/intro).

## ASP.NET Core Razor Pages

> Razor Pages are a mature and supported alternative to Blazor. Razor Pages is a page-based model. UI and business logic concerns are kept separate, but within the page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Razor Pages are a mature and supported alternative to Blazor. Razor Pages adopts a page-based model. UI and business logic concerns are kept separate, but within the page.
```

> Razor pages UI are dynamically rendered on the server to generate the page's HTML and CSS on the server in response to a browser request. The page arrives at the client ready to display. Support for Razor Pages is built on ASP.NET Core MVC.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Razor pages UI are dynamically rendered on the server to generate the page's HTML and CSS in response to a browser request. The page arrives at the client ready to display. Support for Razor Pages is built on ASP.NET Core MVC.
```

author: wadepickett
description: Learn when to use which ASP.NET Core web UI technologies. Understand the server, client and hybrid options.
ms.author: wpickett
ms.date: 10/04/2023
uid: tutorials/choose-web-ui
---
# Choose an ASP.NET Core web UI

ASP.NET Core is a complete UI framework. Choose which functionalities to combine that fit the app's web UI needs.

> ## ASP.NET Core Blazor

Reviewer: The updated Blazor section seems to be focused on giving an overview of what Blazor is all about, which we already have covered in the [updated Blazor Overview for .NET 8](https://learn.microsoft.com/aspnet/core/blazor/?view=aspnetcore-8.0). This is a solid start. The new content has the high-level structure we want. I like how the Razor Pages, MVC, and JavaScript sections are structured: they briefly describe what the framework is and then list the benefits for choosing that option. Can we make the Blazor section more like the other sections?

Reviewer: Benefits of using Blazor:
- Reusable component model
- Efficient diff-based component rendering
- Flexibly render components from the client or server
- Build rich interactive web UI components in C#
- Render components statically from the server
- Progressively enhance server-rendered components for smoother navigation and form handling and to enable streaming rendering
- Share code for common logic on the client and server
- Interop with JavaScript
- Integrate components with existing MVC, Razor Pages, or JavaScript based apps

Author: Commited, thanks.

> Blazor is a full-stack web app framework, recommended for most ASP.NET web UI scenarios.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Blazor is a full-stack web UI framework and is recommended for most web UI scenarios.
```

Blazor renders content with:

* Reusable components included in pages or whole-page, routable components.

> * Switchable rendering modes that can be chosen at runtime for server-side or client-side interactivity.

Reviewer: This bullet seems a bit redundant with the following ones. Maybe just remove it?

```suggestion
* Switchable rendering modes that can be chosen at runtime for server-side or client-side interactivity.
```

Author: I will remove it.  GitHub is giving an error on this line so I will re-commit outside this one.

> * Static server rendering to generate static HTML.

Reviewer: I'd like to also mention the progressive enhancements to static server rendering that we support:

```suggestion
* Static server rendering to generate static HTML.
* Progressive enhancements to static server rendering that enhance navigation and form handling and enable streaming rendering.
```

* Build hybrid desktop and mobile apps with .NET and Blazor.

Blazor Web Apps support interactivity with client rendering that relies on a .NET runtime built with [WebAssembly](https://webassembly.org) that you can download with your app. When running Blazor on WebAssembly, your .NET code can access the full functionality of the browser and interop with JavaScript. Your .NET code runs in the browser's security sandbox with the protections that the sandbox provides against malicious actions on the client machine.

Running .NET code inside web browsers is made possible by [WebAssembly](https://webassembly.org) (abbreviated `wasm`). WebAssembly is a compact bytecode format optimized for fast download and maximum execution speed. WebAssembly is an open web standard and supported in web browsers without plugins. Blazor WebAssembly works in all modern web browsers, including mobile browsers.

When a Blazor WebAssembly is built and run:

* C# code files and Razor files are compiled into .NET assemblies.
* The assemblies and the [.NET runtime](/dotnet/framework/get-started/overview) are downloaded to the browser.

> * Blazor WebAssembly bootstraps the .NET runtime and configures the runtime to load the assemblies for the app. The Blazor WebAssembly runtime uses JavaScript interop to handle DOM manipulation and browser API calls.

Reviewer: This is a lot of content on how Blazor can run on WebAssembly. I don't think we really need any of this in this doc.

Author: Removed content on how Blazor can ron on WebAssembly, thanks.

For a complete overview Blazor, its architecture and benefits, see <xref:blazor/index> and <xref:blazor/hosting-models>. To get started with your first Blazor app, see [Build your first Blazor app](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/learn/aspnet/blazor-tutorial/intro).

## ASP.NET Core Razor Pages

> Razor Pages are a mature and supported alternative to Blazor. Razor Pages adopts a page-based model. UI and business logic concerns are kept separate, but within the page.
> 
> Razor pages UI are dynamically rendered on the server to generate the page's HTML and CSS in response to a browser request. The page arrives at the client ready to display. Support for Razor Pages is built on ASP.NET Core MVC.

Reviewer: Even though Razor Pages is plural, I think we use it as a proper noun to refer to the singular Razor Pages framework.

I'd also prefer to not refer to Razor Pages as a Blazor alternative. Let's just talk about the strengths and weaknesses of each option.

```suggestion
Razor Pages is a page-based model for building server rendered web UI. Razor pages UI are dynamically rendered on the server to generate the page's HTML and CSS in response to a browser request. The page arrives at the client ready to display. Support for Razor Pages is built on ASP.NET Core MVC.
```

Author: Sounds good.  I will re-edit and commit.  GitHub doesn't like that we are adding to a deleted line.

author: wadepickett
description: Learn when to use which ASP.NET Core web UI technologies. Understand the server, client and hybrid options.
ms.author: wpickett
ms.date: 10/04/2023
uid: tutorials/choose-web-ui
---
# Choose an ASP.NET Core web UI

ASP.NET Core is a complete UI framework. Choose which functionalities to combine that fit the app's web UI needs.

## ASP.NET Core Blazor

Blazor is a full-stack web UI framework and is recommended for most web UI scenarios.

> Blazor renders content with:

Reviewer: I've reviewed this list about how Blazor renders content, but I'm not really sure that we need it here. I think what we really want is a list of Blazor benefits like we have in the other sections.

Author: Removed info on how Blazor renders.  Thanks.

To get started with your first ASP.NET Core Razor Pages app, see <xref:tutorials/razor-pages/razor-pages-start>. For a complete overview of ASP.NET Core Razor Pages, its architecture and benefits, see: <xref:razor-pages/index>.

## ASP.NET Core MVC

> ASP.NET Core MVC is a mature and supported alternative to Blazor. ASP.NET Core MVC renders UI on the server and uses a Model-View-Controller (MVC) architectural pattern. The MVC pattern separates an app into three main groups of components: Models, Views, and Controllers. User requests are routed to a controller. The controller is responsible for working with the model to perform user actions or retrieve results of queries. The controller chooses the view to display to the user, and provides it with any model data it requires. Support for Razor Pages is built on ASP.NET Core MVC.

Reviewer 2: I think the parts of the MVC app aren't proper nouns.

```suggestion
ASP.NET Core MVC is a mature and supported alternative to Blazor. ASP.NET Core MVC renders UI on the server and uses a Model-View-Controller (MVC) architectural pattern. The MVC pattern separates an app into three main groups of components: models, views, and controllers. User requests are routed to a controller. The controller is responsible for working with the model to perform user actions or retrieve results of queries. The controller chooses the view to display to the user and provides it with any model data it requires.
```

To get started with your first ASP.NET Core Razor Pages app, see <xref:tutorials/razor-pages/razor-pages-start>. For a complete overview of ASP.NET Core Razor Pages, its architecture and benefits, see: <xref:razor-pages/index>.

## ASP.NET Core MVC

> ASP.NET Core MVC is a mature and supported alternative to Blazor. ASP.NET Core MVC renders UI on the server and uses a Model-View-Controller (MVC) architectural pattern. The MVC pattern separates an app into three main groups of components: models, views, and controllers. User requests are routed to a controller. The controller is responsible for working with the model to perform user actions or retrieve results of queries. The controller chooses the view to display to the user and provides it with any model data it requires.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ASP.NET Core MVC renders UI on the server and uses a Model-View-Controller (MVC) architectural pattern. The MVC pattern separates an app into three main groups of components: models, views, and controllers. User requests are routed to a controller. The controller is responsible for working with the model to perform user actions or retrieve results of queries. The controller chooses the view to display to the user and provides it with any model data it requires.
```

ASP.NET Core MVC benefits:

* Based on a scalable and mature model for building large web apps.
* Clear [separation of concerns](/dotnet/standard/modern-web-apps-azure-architecture/architectural-principles#separation-of-concerns) for maximum flexibility.
* The Model-View-Controller separation of responsibilities ensures that the business model can evolve without being tightly coupled to low-level implementation details.

To get started with  ASP.NET Core MVC, see <xref:tutorials/first-mvc-app/start-mvc>. For an overview of ASP.NET Core MVC's architecture and benefits, see <xref:mvc/overview>.

> ## ASP.NET Core Single Page Application (SPA) with JavaScript Frameworks such as Angular and React

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## ASP.NET Core Single Page Applications (SPA) with frontend JavaScript frameworks
```
